README.md, before:

# Dependencies injection tool for go driven projects

[![Travis Status for breathbath/gotainer](https://api.travis-ci.org/breathbath/gotainer.svg?branch=master&label=linux+build)](https://travis-ci.org/breathbath/gotainer)
[![godoc for breathbath/gotainer](https://godoc.org/github.com/nathany/looper?status.svg)](http://godoc.org/github.com/breathbath/gotainer/container)
[![goreportcard for breathbath/gotainer](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/breathbath/gotainer?v=1)](https://goreportcard.com/report/breathbath/gotainer)
[![codecov for breathbath/gotainer](https://codecov.io/gh/breathbath/gotainer/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/breathbath/gotainer)
[![Sourcegraph for breathbath/gotainer](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/breathbath/gotainer/-/badge.svg)](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/breathbath/gotainer?badge)

This library helps to manage dependencies in your project by providing a centralised logic for initialising services.

You can define any go lang type as a service - a struct, a function (closure or lambda), a scalar value or a dynamic result of your
functions. You do it in a simple manner: you create a container instance and add your services to it under an unique alias.
Further on you can fetch them by this key in any part of your application.

# How to install

        go get github.com/breathbath/gotainer/container

If you use [Go dep tool](https://github.com/golang/dep):

        //1. Add it to your dependencies file
        dep ensure -add github.com/breathbath/gotainer/container

        //2. Use container somewhere in the code (e.g. declare some dependencies)

        //3. Fix the result
        dep ensure

# Quick start

## Declaring services

        //first we create a container
        container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

        //then we declare a callback that will return MyService instance identified by "my_service"
        runtimeContainer.AddConstructor("my_service", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error){
            return MyService{}, nil
        })

If you already have a constructor function, you can add it to the container as well:

        func NewMyService() MyService {
            return MyService{}
        }

        runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("my_service", NewMyService)

## Fetching services
Assuming that you already created a container and declared all needed services, you can start fetching them:

        var myService MyService
        container.Scan("my_service", &myService)
        //at this point myService will contain the initialised instance of MyService, which was either created by
        //the provided callback constructor or by your custom New function
        myService.SomeMethod()

# Use cases

The library covers the following use cases:

## Reusable services with dependencies

Imagine we have 2 services dependant on an another one, which should be reused in both cases. The common service
should be initialised only once as it has an internal state (e.g., db connection).

        //simple service with no dependencies
        type ServiceA struct {}

        //simple service with a dependency
        type ServiceB struct {
            serviceA ServiceA
        }

        //more complex service depending on 2 others, which are also dependant
        type ServiceC struct {
           serviceA ServiceA
           serviceB ServiceB
        }

        //services declaration
        container.AddNewMethod("service_a", package_a.New)
        container.AddNewMethod("service_b", package_b.New, "service_a")
        container.AddNewMethod("service_c", package_c.New, "service_a", "service_b")

        //service fetching, here you can enjoy the fully typed service declaration
        var serviceC ServiceC
        container.scan("service_c", &serviceC)

## Services with a complex initialisation

        type ServiceX struct {...}
        func (sx ServiceX) AddService(sc ServiceC){}
        func (sx ServiceX) EnableLogging(){}
        func (sx ServiceX) RegisterInMonitoringList(monitoringList []MonitoringItem){}

        //we can do a complex ServiceX initialisation, this code will be executed once and all services using
        //"service_x" will have a fully initialised version of it
        container.AddConstructor("service_x",  func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error){
            serviceX := NewServiceX

            var serviceC ServiceC
            c.Scan("service_c", &serviceC)
            serviceX.AddService(serviceC)

            serviceX.EnableLogging()

            var monitoringList []MonitoringItem
            c.Scan("monitoring_list", &monitoringList)
            serviceX.RegisterInMonitoringList(monitoringList)

            return serviceX, nil
        })

## Cached and reusable results of a method call or parameters as dependencies

        func CountItems() int64 {...}

        //in this case CountItems can be an expensive operation that should be executed once
        container.AddConstructor("items_count", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
            return CountItems(), nil
        })

        //we declare a simple string config option as a container service
        container.AddConstructor("static_url", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
            var config Config
            c.Scan("config", &config)

            return config.GetValue("static_url"), nil
        })

## Explicitly non cached services

Sometimes we want to recreate a service every time we fetch it:

        var serviceA ServiceA
        container.ScanNonCached("service_a", &serviceA)

## Services chain

        container.AddConstructor("chained_services", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
               var initialService StartingPoint
               c.Scan("startingPoint", &initialService)
               return initialService.GetA().GetB().GetC(), nil
        })

## Anonymous constructors

        //you actually don't need "new" methods for your services
        container.AddConstructor("service_a", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
               return ServiceA{}
        })

## Dependency events

In some cases your service should get certain dependencies every time when they are added to the container. This logic
helps to to avoid multiple calls of the same method on your service and also detach new dependant services registration
from your main service. Consider following example:

        type MonitoringProvider interface{
            GetMonitoringEvent() (eventName string, count int64)
        }

        type TotalMonitoringProvider struct{...}
        func(tmp TotalMonitoringProvider) GetMonitoringEvent{
            return "total_count", 100
        }

        type ErrorCountProvider struct{...}
        func(tmp ErrorCountProvider) GetMonitoringEvent{
            return "errors_count", 10
        }

        type MonitoringGateway struct{...}
        func (mg MonitoringGateway) AddMonitoringProvider (mp MonitoringProvider)...


In this case we expect new implementations of MonitoringProvider will be added in future. An obvious solution would be:

        func BuildMonitoringGateway(tmp TotalMonitoringProvider, ecp ErrorCountProvider) MonitoringGateway {
            mg := MonitoringGateway{}
            mg.AddMonitoringProvider(tmp)
            mg.AddMonitoringProvider(ecp)
        }

This approach has following problems:

1. With every new implementation of MonitoringProvider you should modify the BuildMonitoringGateway, so this code is not closed to
modification.

2. The amount of arguments of BuildMonitoringGateway will grow, so this function becomes unreadable

3. You should create every new instance of MonitoringProvider somewhere which will probably lead to code duplication, if those
require other services, the amount of boilerplate code will explode

With the Gotainer you can solve this problem with the following code:

        container.AddDependencyObserver("monitoring_provided_added", "monitoring_gateway", func(mg MonitoringGateway, mp MonitoringProvider){
            sg.AddMonitoringProvider(sp)
        })

        container.AddNewMethod("total_monitoring_provider", NewTotalMonitoringProvider, "service_a", "service_b")
        container.RegisterDependencyEvent("monitoring_provided_added", "total_monitoring_provider")

        container.AddNewMethod("error_count_provider", NewErrorCountProvider)
        container.RegisterDependencyEvent("monitoring_provided_added", "error_count_provider")

This has following advantages:

1. MonitoringGateway is completely decoupled from adding new implementations of MonitoringProvider

2. No complex initialisation function for MonitoringGateway is needed

3. Concrete implementations of MonitoringProvider are created once without any repetition as this logic is already encapsulated in the Gotainer.

4. You might have the container declaration for your MonitoringGateway in one core library and different implementations of
MonitoringProvider in other packages, so you are able to plug them in individually in every application with no need to change the
core code.


# Good practices

## Creating a dependency container

1. Declare a function that will be responsible for the container creation, e.g.

        package app_container

        func NewAppContainer() RuntimeContainer {
            container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

            //services declarations here...

            return container
        }

If your application has other libraries that use the container, you can merge all dependency declarations into one.
If your application is very big, you can declare small containers for your packages merge them in your main container method.

        package app_container

        import other_library_container "github.com/myname/other_library/container"

        func NewAppContainer() RuntimeContainer {
            container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

            //services declarations here...

            otherLibraryContainer := other_library_container.NewAppContainer()
            container.Merge(otherLibraryContainer)

            return container
        }

Don't put container init logic into your main.go file as it might grow very big and will not be reusable.

2. Add services declarations in the container init method:

        package app_container

        func NewAppContainer() RuntimeContainer {
            container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

           runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("service_1", NewService1)
           runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("service_2", NewService2, "service_1")
           runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("service_3", NewService2, "service_1", "service_2")

            return container
        }

3. If you have services with optional dependencies, declare them via callbacks:

        //...
        runtimeContainer.AddConstructor("service_a", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
            var logger Logger
            c.Scan("logger", &logger)

            myService := MyService{}
            myService.SetLogger(logger)

            return myService
        })
        //...

4. Don't declare container as a dependency for a service.

        type MyType struct {
            container Container
        }


Generally it's a bad practise for the following reasons:

- Unit testing of such services will be cumbersome as you would need to mock an undefined amount of dependencies,
that your code might require from the container

- Dependencies for your service will be hidden inside, so its public interface will be less obvious for understanding

- You couple your code with the container library, which may produce an overhead in it's usage in other applications or projects

- You run the risk of producing circular dependencies (e.g., your service asks the container for a dependency which requires your service)

## Fetching services

1. Fetch your services only in the main.go method.

       package main

       func main() {
            container := NewAppContainer()

            var interactor SomeInteractor
            container.Scan("interactor", &interactor)

            interactor.DoSomething()
       }

2. Don't pass container as a dependency to your business logic, only your controllers should communicate to it.

3. Use "scan" methods to get typed services. Don't forget to use pointer types in the destination argument (otherwise there will be a panic error).
You can use interface return types and type assertions as well like this:

       package main

       func main() {
            container := NewAppContainer()

            interactor := container.Get("interactor").(Interactor)

            interactor.DoSomething()
       }

## Testing

1. Working with "RuntimeContainer" means that possible errors in a service declaration won't appear until you fetch it from the container.
To make sure, that your declared container has valid service definitions, you should run the "Check" method. You
do it in an integration test as:

        func TestContainer(t *testing.T) {
            container := NewAppContainer()
            container.Check()
        }

Commit message:

Explanation about pointer reference to the container

README.md, after:

# Dependencies injection tool for go driven projects

[![Travis Status for breathbath/gotainer](https://api.travis-ci.org/breathbath/gotainer.svg?branch=master&label=linux+build)](https://travis-ci.org/breathbath/gotainer)
[![godoc for breathbath/gotainer](https://godoc.org/github.com/nathany/looper?status.svg)](http://godoc.org/github.com/breathbath/gotainer/container)
[![goreportcard for breathbath/gotainer](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/breathbath/gotainer?v=1)](https://goreportcard.com/report/breathbath/gotainer)
[![codecov for breathbath/gotainer](https://codecov.io/gh/breathbath/gotainer/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/breathbath/gotainer)
[![Sourcegraph for breathbath/gotainer](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/breathbath/gotainer/-/badge.svg)](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/breathbath/gotainer?badge)

This library helps to manage dependencies in your project by providing a centralised logic for initialising services.

You can define any go lang type as a service - a struct, a function (closure or lambda), a scalar value or a dynamic result of your
functions. You do it in a simple manner: you create a container instance and add your services to it under an unique alias.
Further on you can fetch them by this key in any part of your application.

# How to install

        go get github.com/breathbath/gotainer/container

If you use [Go dep tool](https://github.com/golang/dep):

        //1. Add it to your dependencies file
        dep ensure -add github.com/breathbath/gotainer/container

        //2. Use container somewhere in the code (e.g. declare some dependencies)

        //3. Fix the result
        dep ensure

# Quick start

## Declaring services

        //first we create a container
        container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

        //then we declare a callback that will return MyService instance identified by "my_service"
        runtimeContainer.AddConstructor("my_service", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error){
            return MyService{}, nil
        })

If you already have a constructor function, you can add it to the container as well:

        func NewMyService() MyService {
            return MyService{}
        }

        runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("my_service", NewMyService)

## Fetching services
Assuming that you already created a container and declared all needed services, you can start fetching them:

        var myService MyService
        container.Scan("my_service", &myService)
        //at this point myService will contain the initialised instance of MyService, which was either created by
        //the provided callback constructor or by your custom New function
        myService.SomeMethod()

# Use cases

The library covers the following use cases:

## Reusable services with dependencies

Imagine we have 2 services dependant on an another one, which should be reused in both cases. The common service
should be initialised only once as it has an internal state (e.g., db connection).

        //simple service with no dependencies
        type ServiceA struct {}

        //simple service with a dependency
        type ServiceB struct {
            serviceA ServiceA
        }

        //more complex service depending on 2 others, which are also dependant
        type ServiceC struct {
           serviceA ServiceA
           serviceB ServiceB
        }

        //services declaration
        container.AddNewMethod("service_a", package_a.New)
        container.AddNewMethod("service_b", package_b.New, "service_a")
        container.AddNewMethod("service_c", package_c.New, "service_a", "service_b")

        //service fetching, here you can enjoy the fully typed service declaration
        var serviceC ServiceC
        container.scan("service_c", &serviceC)

## Services with a complex initialisation

        type ServiceX struct {...}
        func (sx ServiceX) AddService(sc ServiceC){}
        func (sx ServiceX) EnableLogging(){}
        func (sx ServiceX) RegisterInMonitoringList(monitoringList []MonitoringItem){}

        //we can do a complex ServiceX initialisation, this code will be executed once and all services using
        //"service_x" will have a fully initialised version of it
        container.AddConstructor("service_x",  func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error){
            serviceX := NewServiceX

            var serviceC ServiceC
            c.Scan("service_c", &serviceC)
            serviceX.AddService(serviceC)

            serviceX.EnableLogging()

            var monitoringList []MonitoringItem
            c.Scan("monitoring_list", &monitoringList)
            serviceX.RegisterInMonitoringList(monitoringList)

            return serviceX, nil
        })

## Cached and reusable results of a method call or parameters as dependencies

        func CountItems() int64 {...}

        //in this case CountItems can be an expensive operation that should be executed once
        container.AddConstructor("items_count", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
            return CountItems(), nil
        })

        //we declare a simple string config option as a container service
        container.AddConstructor("static_url", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
            var config Config
            c.Scan("config", &config)

            return config.GetValue("static_url"), nil
        })

## Explicitly non cached services

Sometimes we want to recreate a service every time we fetch it:

        var serviceA ServiceA
        container.ScanNonCached("service_a", &serviceA)

## Services chain

        container.AddConstructor("chained_services", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
               var initialService StartingPoint
               c.Scan("startingPoint", &initialService)
               return initialService.GetA().GetB().GetC(), nil
        })

## Anonymous constructors

        //you actually don't need "new" methods for your services
        container.AddConstructor("service_a", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
               return ServiceA{}
        })

## Dependency events

In some cases your service should get certain dependencies every time when they are added to the container. This logic
helps to to avoid multiple calls of the same method on your service and also detach new dependant services registration
from your main service. Consider following example:

        type MonitoringProvider interface{
            GetMonitoringEvent() (eventName string, count int64)
        }

        type TotalMonitoringProvider struct{...}
        func(tmp TotalMonitoringProvider) GetMonitoringEvent{
            return "total_count", 100
        }

        type ErrorCountProvider struct{...}
        func(tmp ErrorCountProvider) GetMonitoringEvent{
            return "errors_count", 10
        }

        type MonitoringGateway struct{...}
        func (mg MonitoringGateway) AddMonitoringProvider (mp MonitoringProvider)...


In this case we expect new implementations of MonitoringProvider will be added in future. An obvious solution would be:

        func BuildMonitoringGateway(tmp TotalMonitoringProvider, ecp ErrorCountProvider) MonitoringGateway {
            mg := MonitoringGateway{}
            mg.AddMonitoringProvider(tmp)
            mg.AddMonitoringProvider(ecp)
        }

This approach has following problems:

1. With every new implementation of MonitoringProvider you should modify the BuildMonitoringGateway, so this code is not closed to
modification.

2. The amount of arguments of BuildMonitoringGateway will grow, so this function becomes unreadable

3. You should create every new instance of MonitoringProvider somewhere which will probably lead to code duplication, if those
require other services, the amount of boilerplate code will explode

With the Gotainer you can solve this problem with the following code:

        container.AddDependencyObserver("monitoring_provided_added", "monitoring_gateway", func(mg MonitoringGateway, mp MonitoringProvider){
            sg.AddMonitoringProvider(sp)
        })

        container.AddNewMethod("total_monitoring_provider", NewTotalMonitoringProvider, "service_a", "service_b")
        container.RegisterDependencyEvent("monitoring_provided_added", "total_monitoring_provider")

        container.AddNewMethod("error_count_provider", NewErrorCountProvider)
        container.RegisterDependencyEvent("monitoring_provided_added", "error_count_provider")

This has following advantages:

1. MonitoringGateway is completely decoupled from adding new implementations of MonitoringProvider

2. No complex initialisation function for MonitoringGateway is needed

3. Concrete implementations of MonitoringProvider are created once without any repetition as this logic is already encapsulated in the Gotainer.

4. You might have the container declaration for your MonitoringGateway in one core library and different implementations of
MonitoringProvider in other packages, so you are able to plug them in individually in every application with no need to change the
core code.


# Good practices

## Creating a dependency container

1. Declare a function that will be responsible for the container creation, e.g.

        package app_container

        func NewAppContainer() RuntimeContainer {
            container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

            //services declarations here...

            return container
        }

If your application has other libraries that use the container, you can merge all dependency declarations into one.
If your application is very big, you can declare small containers for your packages merge them in your main container method.

        package app_container

        import other_library_container "github.com/myname/other_library/container"

        func NewAppContainer() RuntimeContainer {
            container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

            //services declarations here...

            otherLibraryContainer := other_library_container.NewAppContainer()
            container.Merge(otherLibraryContainer)

            return *container
        }

Don't put container init logic into your main.go file as it might grow very big and will not be reusable.

The best way to avoid this is to return a container from your "NewAppContainer" method rather than a pointer to it.
This will make sure that your container won't be modified at runtime in your business code.

2. Add services declarations in the container init method:

        package app_container

        func NewAppContainer() RuntimeContainer {
            container := container.NewRuntimeContainer()

           runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("service_1", NewService1)
           runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("service_2", NewService2, "service_1")
           runtimeContainer.AddNewMethod("service_3", NewService2, "service_1", "service_2")

            return container
        }

3. If you have services with optional dependencies, declare them via callbacks:

        //...
        runtimeContainer.AddConstructor("service_a", func(c container.Container) (interface{}, error) {
            var logger Logger
            c.Scan("logger", &logger)

            myService := MyService{}
            myService.SetLogger(logger)

            return myService
        })
        //...

4. Don't declare container as a dependency for a service.

        type MyType struct {
            container Container
        }


Generally it's a bad practise for the following reasons:

- Unit testing of such services will be cumbersome as you would need to mock an undefined amount of dependencies,
that your code might require from the container

- Dependencies for your service will be hidden inside, so its public interface will be less obvious for understanding

- You couple your code with the container library, which may produce an overhead in it's usage in other applications or projects

- You run the risk of producing circular dependencies (e.g., your service asks the container for a dependency which requires your service)

## Fetching services

1. Fetch your services only in the main.go method.

       package main

       func main() {
            container := NewAppContainer()

            var interactor SomeInteractor
            container.Scan("interactor", &interactor)

            interactor.DoSomething()
       }

2. Don't pass container as a dependency to your business logic, only your controllers should communicate to it.

3. Use "scan" methods to get typed services. Don't forget to use pointer types in the destination argument (otherwise there will be a panic error).
You can use interface return types and type assertions as well like this:

       package main

       func main() {
            container := NewAppContainer()

            interactor := container.Get("interactor").(Interactor)

            interactor.DoSomething()
       }

## Testing

Working with "RuntimeContainer" means that possible errors in a service declaration won't appear until you fetch it from the container.
To make sure, that your declared container has valid service definitions, you should run the "Check" method. You
do it in an integration test as:

        func TestContainer(t *testing.T) {
            container := NewAppContainer()
            container.Check()
        }
